# template

This repository contains an implementation of the template test
for uniform randum number distributions.  In this repository, the
same template test is being used to illustrate how poor random
number generators fail the test in two different ways.  A random
number generator with a short period length may fail the template
test with a wrap-around error.  This error means that the period
length of the generator is shorter than the number of samples in
the template test.  When the random number generator repeats itself,
after 1024 successive generations of repetition, the wrap-around
error is flagged, and the template test terminates with a return
code of 1 and an error message.

The second kind of error generated by the template test is a chi
square failure.  A P-value greater than 0.999 or less than 0.001
is an indication of a chi square failure.  The RANDU generator
usually produces a chi square error in this test.  This repository
contains more weak random number generators than RANDU to illustrate
how the template test may fail.

fibotmplt.c contails a fibonacci random number generator, that
produces a chi square error.

lfsr.c contains a simple 64 bit LFSR generator, that produces a
chi square error.

lfsr16.c contains a simple 16 bit LFSR generator, that produces
a wrap-around error.  The generator has a period length of
65535 generations.  This period length is much shorter
than the number of samples in the test.  There are 10 million
samples in the test.

randu.c contains the weak 32 bit RANDU generator, which produces
a chi square error.

randu16.c contains a 16 bit RANDU generator, which produces a
wrap-around error.  The generator has a period length of
16384 generations.  This period length is much shorter
than the number of samples in the test.  There are 10 million
samples in the test.

sintmplt.c contains a random number generator that follows a
sine distribution.  A uniform number from zero to one is
multiplied by PI to produce a uniform distribution from zero
to PI radians.  The radian is then converted to a sine with the
sine function.  That produces a number between zero and one.
That number is multiplied by 8 to produce a token to be used in
the template test.  The chi square test fails in this template
test because of the sine distribution.

tmplt.c contains the same template test as in the eegl64
repository.  The eegl64 uniform random number generator is used
in this test.  This test passes the chi square test, and does not
produce a wrap-around error.  The period length of the eegl64
generator approximates 1.2 * 10^61036 generations, far longer
than the ten million samples in the test.

etaustmplt.c contains the same template test as in the etaus
repository.  The etaus uniform random number generator is used
in this test.  This test passes the chi square test, and does not
produce a wrap-around error.  The period length of the etaus
generator approximates 1.2 * 10^61036 generations, far longer
than the ten million samples in the test.

alftmplt.c uses the etaus random number generator to create
a template from an alphabet parameter, and then selects 10
million overlapping letters from the same alphabet at random
to match against the template.  Alftmplt passes the chi square
test at the end.  As expected, the longer the alphabet, the
fewer the degrees of freedom there are in the chi square test.

gsltmplt.c contains template tests of all the GNU Scientific
Library random number generators.  The parameter for this
program is a name of a generator.  To see a list of GSL
generators, use a parameter for a non-existing generator,
like zzz.  The following message will occur.

GSL_RNG_TYPE=zzz not recognized
Valid generator types are:
           borosh13               cmrg            coveyou          fishman18
          fishman20          fishman2x              gfsr4           knuthran
          knuthran2       knuthran2002          lecuyer21             minstd
                mrg            mt19937       mt19937_1999       mt19937_1998
               r250               ran0               ran1               ran2
               ran3               rand             rand48      random128-bsd
   random128-glibc2    random128-libc5      random256-bsd   random256-glibc2
    random256-libc5       random32-bsd    random32-glibc2     random32-libc5
       random64-bsd    random64-glibc2     random64-libc5        random8-bsd
     random8-glibc2      random8-libc5         random-bsd      random-glibc2
       random-libc5              randu               ranf             ranlux
          ranlux389            ranlxd1            ranlxd2            ranlxs0
            ranlxs1            ranlxs2             ranmar             slatec
               taus              taus2            taus113         transputer
              tt800                uni              uni32                vax
         waterman14                zuf

Two GSL generators fail the template test:  randu and slatec.
Randu fails the chi square test, and slatec fails with a
wrap-around error.

To install the GNU Scientific Library, use the following
commands.

apt-get install libgsl-dev

apt-get install libgsl2

apt-get install gsl-ref-html        # for documentation

dietmplt.c contains a template test of generators produced by
the dieharder package.  See README.dieharder for a full description
of this test.  dietmplt.c uses a table of maximum integers for
the generators to prevent a variety of errors, including
chi square errors and wrap-around errors.  getmax.sh is a
script that shows the maximum integer for each generator
based on one million samples.  The script for running dietmplt.c
is called dietmplt.sh, with one parameter, the dieharder
generator number.  README.dieharder includes a list of dieharder
random number generators.

To install this repository, read the INSTALL document.
Read the TESTING document for testing instructions.

If you have a random number generator not included in this
repository, you are welcome to add more template test programs
to this repository.

